DOUGLAS FINKBEINER dfinkbeiner@cfa.harvard.edu"CV

JOHN M. KOVAC jmkovac@cfa.harvard.edu"List of Publications

IRWIN I. SHAPIRO shapiro@cfa.harvard.eduPerkins"List of Publications

CHRISTOPHER W. STUBBS stubbs@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Christopher Stubbs is an experimental physicist working at the interface between particle physics, cosmology and gravitation. His interests include experimental tests of the foundations of gravitational physics, searches for dark matter, and observational cosmology. He is one of the principal investigators on an ambitious survey that will use hundreds of supernovae to map out the recent expansion history of the Universe. The main goal of this program is to ascertain the equation of state of the Dark Energy that appears to be driving an ever-accelerating expansion of the Universe. Stubbs is also engaged in a companion program that is using gravitational lensing to search for dark matter in the form of compact astronomical objects (MACHOs). He is also a member of a collaboration that is using the Earth-Moon-Sun system to probe for novel gravitational effects that may result from physics beyond the standard model.

RONALD L. WALSWORTH rwalsworth@cfa.harvard.eduHarvard-Smithsonian"Ron Walsworth leads an interdisciplinary research group with a focus on developing precision measurement tools and applying them to important problems in both the physical and life sciences: from AMO physics, astrophysics and nanoscience to bioimaging, brain science and medical diagnostics.Current areas of research include: nanoscale magnetometry and spin physics with Nitrogen Vacancy (NV) centers in diamond; the use of laser frequency combs as improved optical wavelength calibrators for astrophysics, with applications to the search for Earth-like exoplanets; precision tests of fundamental physical laws and symmetries using maser atomic clocks; super-resolution optical imaging and functionalized electron microscopy for brain science and other bioimaging applications; and the development of novel NMR and MRI tools, with applications to basic spin physics and medical imaging.

JOHN M. DOYLE doyle@physics.harvard.eduLyman"John Doyle's research centers on trapping neutral particles, study of fundamental collisional processes in atoms and molecules, and lab and underground-observatory-based searches for physics beyond the Standard Model. He is also currently working to realize new techniques to trap molecules and atoms and produce intense beams of the same.
The Doyle group has pioneered a general technique for cooling and loading atoms and molecules into traps. First demonstrated with atomic europium and chromium and molecular CaH, the technique uses cryogenic helium buffer gas to cool atoms to below 1 Kelvin. The cold atoms are then loaded into a magnetic trap and then evaporatively cooled. This has led to the discovery of several new findings on the physics of cold collisions as well as doubling the number of species magnetically trapped, including exotic atoms such as Dy. In addition, by developing a new technique for producing heavy, polar radical molecules in an intense beam, he has launched with collaborators a new EDM search. Heavy, highly polar molecules are ideally suited to the search for a permanent electric dipole moment (EDM) in the electron. The discovery of an EDM in these experiments would indicate new physics beyond the standard model. Work towards production of ultracold molecules aims also to build hybrid quantum devices. Finally, work is ongoing to use XUV scintillation in liquid neon and argon to search for a key Dark Matter candidate, the WIMP.

GERALD GABRIELSE gabrielse@physics.harvard.eduLyman"The Gabrielse research group enjoys a variety of atomic, optical, elementary particle, plasma and low temperature physics experiments. A one-electron quantum cyclotron has made it possible to measure the dimensionless electron magnetic moment 15 times more accurately than a measurement that stood for twenty years, and to determine the fine structure constant 20 times more accurately than does any independent method. A separate measurement, in collaboration with Prof. Doyle and Prof. DeMille (Yale), seeks a substantial improvement in measuring the electric dipole moment of the electron. In addition, the most precise laser spectroscopy of helium fine structure intervals, stabilized by an iodine optical clock and an optical comb, provides a way to test two-electron QED.
Professor Gabrielse led the international TRAP team that developed the techniques to accumulate antiprotons at energies more than 1010 times lower than previously realized. This enabled the most stringent CPT test with baryons, made by comparing charge-to-mass ratios for a single antiproton and proton to an accuracy of 90 parts per trillion. The international ATRAP Collaboration, also led by Gabrielse, now uses these antiprotons to produce cold antihydrogen atoms, an important step towards comparing antihydrogen and hydrogen atoms via precise laser spectroscopy. Technological spin-offs include a patented solenoid design being used for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ion cyclotron resonance (ICR), along with improved cell designs for ICR.

JENE A. GOLOVCHENKO golovchenko@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Jene Golovchenko's research focuses on revealing and understanding the basic physics involved when various forms of radiation interact with atomic and condensed matter systems. He performs experiments where highly controlled electron, positron, atom, x-ray, ion and laser beams are used to reveal new phenomena connected with the radiation-matters system. Such experiments lead to the development of new probes to study matter and new techniques to modify and transform it into new forms. More recently Professor Golovchenko has applied these and other methods to the biophysics of polymers like DNA. Students in Professor Golovchenko's group get a broad exposure to the most advanced experimental tools and methods as well as the opportunity to express their experimental and theoretical creativity in problems of importance in pure and applied science. Specific areas of research pursued include Bose condensation by laser cooling, de Broglie atom wave optics of ultra cold atoms, annihilation in flight of MeV positrons as a probe of atomic scale magnetic structure, electronic sequencing of DNA in atomic scale solid state nanopores, X-ray optics in curved space, atomic scale properties of semiconductor surfaces in ultra high vacuum environments using tunneling microscopy, ion channeling and molecular beam epitaxy.
Jene Golovchenko has had a broad research career, working in academia, at Harvard and Aarhus University in Denmark, in industry, at Bell Labs, in national laboratories at Brookhaven and Livermore and at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. He is also a member of the Rowland Institute for Science, an interdisciplinary nonprofit basic research institute in Cambridge. These affiliations have helped his students obtain broad perspectives on research and opportunities for furthering their careers when they graduate from Harvard.

MARKUS GREINER greiner@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"Markus Greiner's research is focused on experiments with ultracold atoms, in which strongly correlated many-body quantum systems can be experimentally realized in a well controlled way. This opens the door for studying fundamental questions of modern condensed matter and quantum information physics with atomic physics experiments. By loading ultracold atoms into an optical lattice potential, he and his colleagues in Munich were able to observe a quantum phase transition from a superfluid to a Mott insulator. They also created highly entangled states in optical lattices and produced molecules via photo association. Together with his colleagues in Colorado, he was working with fermionic atoms and observed the first condensate of generalized Cooper pairs in the BCS-BEC crossover regime.
With his new team at Harvard, Professor Greiner is creating very accessible quantum systems of bosonic and fermionic atoms in optical lattices and is developing a novel quantum gas microscope. These experiments should allow the team to realize novel strongly correlated quantum states and to study them with unprecedented control.

LENE VESTERGAARD HAU hau@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Lene Hau's latest research has centered on cold atoms and Bose-Einstein condensation. Her group uses laser cooling to efficiently precool atoms to temperatures in the microkelvin regime. Subsequently, the atoms are trapped in a 4 Dee magnet and evaporatively cooled to nanokelvin temperatures, which results in the creation of Bose-Einstein condensates typically containing millions of atoms. The condensates are formed in an ultra high vacuum system constructed for easy access to and manipulation of cold atom clouds with light probes and mechanical structures.
Recently, the Hau group succeeded in reducing the light speed to 17 m/s (the speed of a racing bicycle) by optically inducing a quantum interference in a Bose-Einstein condensate. Ultra slow light creates a unique, new tool for probing the fundamental properties of Bose-Einstein condensates. Examples are: coupling of light and sound, an atom laser with controllable, localized output coupling, and studies of the dynamical formation of condensates. The system also exhibits extreme optical properties: Hau's group has demonstrated a nonlinear refractive index which is 14 orders of magnitude larger that the nonlinear index in an optical fiber and the largest ever measured by a factor of a million.
This has opened up a new territory of nonlinear optics at extremely low light levels, with interesting prospects for areas of quantum optics such as optical squeezing, quantum nondemolition, and studies of nonlocality. Intriguing potential applications of the large nonlinearities include creation of optical switches that work at the single photon level, dynamically programmable optical delay lines, and serial to parallel conversion.
A practical system could possibly be based on atom cooling with the use of diode lasers and micro-traps relating to another of Hau's interests: atomic wave guides for cold atoms. Hau and collaborators were the first to suggest a wave-guide for cold atoms based on a mechanical structure. The suggested "Kapitza guide" involves dynamical stabilization of atom motion around a metallic wire with time varying electric potentials. The resulting atom dynamics is intriguing and coupled with Bose-Einstein condensates, the wave-guide offers a unique possibility for studying chaos in a many body, interacting system. Furthermore, a condensate could adiabatically be transferred from the 4 Dee magnet to the wave-guide states, leading to output coupling and transport of coherent atomic matter waves. The Kapitza guide can thus be regarded as the matter wave analogue of optical fibers used as guiding structures for coherent light.

ERIC J. HELLER heller@physics.harvard.eduMallinckrodt"Eric Heller's research group focuses on few body quantum mechanics, scattering theory and quantum chaos. Recurrent but not universal themes are semiclassical approximations, classical nonlinear dynamics and time-dependent quantum mechanics. Recent progress in semiclassical methods has allowed a wide range of new quantum problems to be understood in terms of classical mechanics, greatly aiding physical insight. At the other end of the spectrum, the extreme quantum limit (e.g. ultracold collisions) have come to the forefront and are also group interests.
Current investigations include cold atom waveguides, scattering theory of quantum dots and electron transport in semiconductor heterostructures, surface state electron "quantum corral" scattering from defects and adsorbed atoms on metal surfaces, localization theory of eigenstates, semiclassical theory of tunneling and diffraction, semiclassical approaches to many body systems, ocean wave physics, and quantum correspondence to classical chaos (scars, spectra, wavefunctions, dynamics).

MIKHAIL D. LUKIN lukin@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Mikhail Lukin's research is in the areas of quantum optics and atomic physics. The emphasis is on studies of quantum systems consisting of interacting photons, atoms, molecules and electrons coupled to realistic environments. We are developing new techniques for controlling the quantum dynamics of such systems, and studying fundamental physical phenomena associated with them. These techniques are used to explore new physics, as well as to facilitate implementation of potential applications in emerging areas such as quantum information science and in more traditional fields such as nonlinear optics. In the course of this work we are also exploring the emerging interfaces between quantum optics and atomic physics on the one hand, and condensed matter and mesoscopic physics on the other.

KANGni@chemistry.harvard.eduMallinckrodt"
HONGKUN PARK hpark@chemistry.harvard.eduConant"Nanometer-sized materials represent a natural size limit of the miniaturization trend of current technology, and they exhibit physical and chemical properties significantly different from their bulk counterparts. The research interest of Hongkun Park lies in developing detailed physical and chemical understanding of chemically derived nanostructures through new experimental methods and applying this knowledge to possible technological applications. Current research efforts toward these general goals are centered on two areas: (1) to study electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of individual molecules, clusters, nanowires, carbon nanotubes, and their arrays using combined transport, scanning probe and optical measurements and to develop detailed understanding of their behaviors, and (2) to develop synthesis methods for transition-metal-oxide and chalcogenide nanostructures that exhibit novel electronic and magnetic properties and to study the role of phase transitions in determining their properties at the individual nanostructure level.
Another research interest of Hongkun Park is to investigate spatiotemporal dynamics of neural networks by developing neuroelectronic interfaces. Neural networks, collections of neurons interconnected by synaptic junctions, form the physical basis of the central and peripheral nervous systems in biological organisms. These networks are responsible not only for the reaction of the organism to external stimuli but also for more highly organized cognitive functions such as memory, learning, and logic. Hongkun Park is interested in deciphering the inner workings of neural networks by coupling model mesoscale neural networks composed of 102 ~ 103 hippocampal neurons with complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-based multielectrode and transistor arrays and by probing real-time dynamics of neural connections using both electrical and optical interrogation. The research efforts should enable the detailed mapping of the action potential propagation and synaptic adaptation within the network, and therefore help answer crucial questions pertaining to biological neural networks.

EUGENE DEMLER demler@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Interactions and correlations in condensed matter systems often manifest themselves in striking and novel properties of the materials. Many examples can be found among superconductors and superfluids, quantum magnets, integer and fractional quantum Hall systems. In spite of the apparent differences among various materials and compounds, there are numerous universal phenomena that take place in interacting fermionic and bosonic systems. The main focus of Eugene Demler's work has been developing general theoretical tools for understanding the effects of interactions, and establishing a common framework for understanding the physics of strongly correlated systems. Demler's research has addressed various properties of high temperature superconductors, heavy fermion and organic superconductors, quantum Hall systems, and quantum antiferromagnets. Demler's research interests also include mesoscopic superconductivity, magnetic and superconducting proximity effects, understanding the effect of dissipation on quantum phase transitions, and Bose-Einstein condensation of alkali atoms.

ROY J. GLAUBER glauber@physics.harvard.eduLyman"2005 Nobel Prize in Physics"for his contribution to the quantum theory of optical coherence."

SUBIR SACHDEV  sachdev@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Quantum mechanics was originally developed by Schroedinger and Heisenberg as a theory of non-relativistic charged particles interacting via the Coulomb force, and successfully applied to a simple two-particle system like the hydrogen atom. However, among its most important applications has been the description of 1023 particles found in macroscopic matter. The earliest example of this was the Sommerfeld-Bloch theory of electronic motion in metals, and its refined formulation in Landau's Fermi liquid theory. Although solving Schroedinger's wave equation for 1023 interacting electrons appears an impossibly daunting task, Landau outlined a powerful strategy, involving the concept of "quasiparticles", which allowed an essentially exact description of the low temperature properties of metals. The quasiparticles have an essentially free electron-like character. Although interactions between the electrons do strongly renormalize various parameters in the effective Hamiltonian, the quantum dynamics of the quasiparticles is essentially that of nearly free electrons, each of which can be described independently by single-particle quantum mechanics.
Since the mid-80's, much attention has been lavished on a variety of transition metal compounds, whose physical properties do not fit easily into the Landau paradiagm. The most important among these compounds are ceramics, like YBa2Cu3O7, in which the electronic motion occurs primarily in two-dimensional CuO2 layers, and which display high temperature superconductivity. It is clear that electron-electron interactions are playing a much more fundamental role here, and the excitations are qualitatively different from individual electrons.
Subir Sachdev's research has focused on the classification of the many-body ground states of interacting electrons, especially in two spatial dimensions. Fundamental distinctions between such ground states imply that they cannot be smoothly connected to each other (whereas the Landau Fermi liquid is smoothly connected to the independent electron state). Such states are necessarily separated by quantum phase transitions at a quantum critical point (QCP). The QCP has novel properties and usually does not permit a quasiparticle description. Although the QCP is only a special point in the zero temperature phase diagram, it turns out to be a useful point of departure for understanding the physical properties of phases in its vicinity both at zero and non-zero temperatures. Remarkably, it is often the case that quantum mechanics is crucial to understanding the collective properties of 1023 electrons in these materials, even at temperatures as high as room temperature and at the longest time and distance scales.

SUSANNE YELIN syelin@physics.harvard.edu"
HOWARD BERG hberg@mcb.harvard.eduHarvard"We study bacteria, the simplest free-living single-celled organisms. We are interested in how they sense changes in their environment, analyze sensory data, and respond in a purposeful manner. Our quest is an understanding of behavior at the molecular level, especially behavior involving chemical stimuli (chemotaxis). Our primary subject is the peritrichously-flagellated bacteriumEscherichia coli, that lives in your gut. We are trying to learn how its flagellar motors work, how their directions of rotation are controlled by the cell's sensory-transduction network, and what effect that rotation has on modes of flagellar propulsion. Our main interest is free-swimming cells, but we also study cells that swarm (swim in a coordinated manner over moist surfaces), or twitch (Pseudomonas) or glide (Cytophaga,Mycoplasma).

ADAM E. COHEN cohen@chemistry.harvard.eduMallinckrodt"
MICHAEL M. DESAI desai@physics.harvard.edu"Natural selection and other evolutionary forces leave characteristic signatures in the genetic variation within populations. Our group uses a combination of theoretical and experimental approaches to study how this genetic variation is created and maintained, and to develop methods to infer the evolutionary history of populations from the variation observed in sequence data. Our focus is primarily on the dynamics and population genetics of natural selection in asexual populations such as microbes and viruses, which are often dominated by the random fluctuations in when and where rare mutational events occur. We are developing new approaches to population genetic theory to better understand the structure of genetic variation in these populations. To complement this theoretical work, we have developed high-throughput techniques which allow us to directly observe the evolution of thousands of experimental budding yeast populations simultaneously, tracking changes in fitness and other phenotypic characteristics and correlating these with the evolution of genetic variation within and between populations.

EREL LEVINE elevine@physics.harvard.eduLyman"
MAHADEVAN lm@seas.harvard.eduPierce"My work and that of my group centers around trying to understand the organization of matter in space and time, particularly in characterizing shape and flow at the everyday scale, and is thus closely tied in with experience and experiments. We have a small lab for tinkering around. Past work has explored problems at the intersection of mathematics and classical continuum/statistical physics, subjects with enormous explanatory power and veins that runs deep. While I maintain an interest in these subjects, more recently I have become fascinated by the possibility that it is possible to use quantitative approaches in biology, medicine and beyond.

ERIC MAZUR mazur@physics.harvard.eduPierce"Eric Mazurs research group uses ultra-short laser pulses to study ultrafast dynamics in physical systems and to create extreme non-equilibrium conditions in matter. For instance, ultrashort laser pulses provide a direct view of the ultrafast carrier and lattice dynamics in photo excited solids. A better understanding of electron behavior in solids is important for both microelectronics and micromachining applications. Mazur's group also uses these short laser pulses to coherently control the lattice dynamics in solids on the femtosecond time scale.
The high intensity of ultrashort laser pulses can also be used to micromachine waveguides and other photonic structures inside transparent materials. Such structures can be used to fabricate highly integrated photonic devices. Mazur's group currently studies the physical processes that take place during micromachining and is developing an array of active and passive photonic devices. By tightly focusing these laser pulses inside biological samples, the group recently developed a nanosurgery technique that allows the micro manipulation of subcellular organelles inside living cells and small organisms.
Mazur's group also discovered a modified form of silicon obtained by focusing femtosecond laser pulses on the surface of a silicon wafer in the presence of a sulfur containing gas. The optoelectronic properties of the resulting microstructured surface provide interesting physics and open the door to new applications.

VINOTHAN MANOHARAN manoharan@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Some of the most difficult problems in condensed matter and biophysics today involve understanding how systems order themselves and why they sometimes fail to do so. Why do some liquids form glasses rather than crystals when cooled? How do proteins consistently fold into unique structures, given the myriad possible paths available to them? What are the forces between macromolecules, and how do those forces determine the structure of aggregates (and living things)? A related problem in materials science and nanotechnology involves preparing materials that organize themselves in three dimensions.
In my lab we use light scattering, optical microscopy, spectroscopy, synthesis and other experimental techniques to understand the physics of self-organization. For most of these experiments we use colloids, suspensions of particles typically about a micrometer in size. Because these particles are small enough to be buffeted about by Brownian motion, yet large enough that their motion is directly visible, they are extremely useful: they can be used as tracers to probe the internal dynamics of networks and fluids, as "handles" that can be attached to proteins and DNA so that these molecules can be manipulated with optical tweezers, and as generic model systems for understanding how random motion transforms disorder to order.

MARA PRENTISS prentiss@fas.harvard.eduLyman"The research group headed by Mara Prentiss emphasizes the manipulation of matter by light. The experiments are based on the interaction between a laser field and the dipole moment induced in an atom by the field. Professor Prentiss is head of the Consortium for Light Force Dynamics, through which the group collaborates with NIST at Gaithersburg, Colorado State University, and the Harvard Chemistry Department.
The Prentiss group has pioneered the field of atom lithography, which uses light to manipulate a neutral atomic beam as it is deposited on a substrate.
Other atom optics research has included theoretical and experimental work on focusing and beamsplitting techniques, including research with the Westervelt group using magnetic fields to control atomic motion. In addition, the Prentiss group has explored novel atom cooling and trapping techniques and has used light forces to self-assemble optical devices. Finally, a collaboration with the Whitesides group in the Harvard Chemistry Department has demonstrated polymer and silica waveguides fabricated using microtransfer molding. Investigations of applications of the waveguides to optical communication, sensing, and atom optics are in progress.

ARAVINTHAN SAMUEL samuel@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Animals are intrinsically computational. We acquire sensory information about our environments, transform this information into neural representations and memories, and calculate and execute decisions based on recent and past experiences. Our own brains are staggeringly complex, with billions of neurons networked by trillions of synapses. But the basic "stuff" of our brains - molecular and cellular structures and interactions - is shared with our simplest animal relatives. Thus simple and well-chosen model organisms can be accessible vantage points with perspective over general biological principles. We study brain and behavior in the roundworm C. elegans. The worm only has 302 neurons, but is capable of a variety of behaviors that display a range of computational powers. We focus specifically on navigational behaviors to physical sensory inputs. Physical sensory inputs can be delivered to the behaving worm both reliably and quantifiably. Navigation itself can be reduced to a quantified pattern as an alternating sequence of forward movements, turns, and reversals. From the systematic analysis of outward motile behavior we can infer the inner workings of neural algorithms. Applying recent advances in microscopy and optics, we are also able to manipulate and monitor the workings of these neural circuits in the intact animal. In this way, we strive to link brain and behavior in the simple but fascinating creature.

DAVID A. WEITZ weitz@physics.harvard.eduPierce"David Weitz's group studies the physics of soft condensed matter, materials which are easily deformed by external stresses, electric, magnetic or gravitational fields, or even by thermal fluctuations. These materials typically possess structures which are much larger than atomic or molecular scales; the structure and dynamics at the mesoscopic scales determine macroscopic physical properties. The goal of this research is to probe and understand the relationship between mesoscopic structure and bulk properties. We study both synthetic and biological materials; our interests extend from fundamental physics to technological applications, from basic materials questions to specific biological problems. The techniques we use include video image analysis, light scattering, optical microscopy, rheology, and laser tweezing. We also develop new techniques to study these materials; we pioneered the use of multiple scattered waves to study dynamics and mechanical properties of materials, and applied these optical methods to measure the rheological properties of materials in what is now called microrheology.
There are currently three major research themes in the group. The first is colloid physics, which includes the study of colloidal particles as models systems for the study of materials. We investigatge the growth and dynamics of colloidal crystals, glasses and gels; light scattering and confocal microscopy are combined to probe both structure and dynamics of these materials. We investigate the structure and properties of glasses and gels formed with attractive interactions, and search for the universal behavior that can describe such disordered structures. This work is motivated both by fundamental interest and important applications of these systems to create novel structures and to model the properties of materials.
A second major theme is biophysics. We focus on the mechanical properties of cells, and develop new methods to probe these properties. We use purified proteins to form reconstituted biopolymer networks, and study rheological properties of these systems. By incorporating molecular motors into these networks, we study the properties of highly non-equilibrium, active materials, and develop models to describe the properties of such materials. We apply the insight gained from these model systems to investigate the mechanical behavior of cells.
The third major theme is microfluidics, where our focus is on the use of multiphase fluid flow to create, control and use emulsions with microfluidic devices. We engineer novel structures made from colloids, polymers or lipids that can be used to encapsulate materials. These structures are formed from multiple emulsions which are controllably produced with microfluidic devices. In addition, we are developing microfluidic devices that use individual droplets as microreactors, with volumes as small as femtoliters. The precise control over these droplets afforded by the microfluidic devices enables us to use them as reaction vessels for very high throughput studies of biological reactions. We are developing methods to improve the functionality of enzymes through directed evolution of their function, and to study the properties of large populations of individual cells encapsulated within the droplets.
Our work spans fundamental science to direct applications. Many projects are carried out in collaboration with industry; we do the fundamental science that also addresses important technological questions. In addition, some of our work is spun out into start-up companies, providing alternate career opportunities.

DAVID R. NELSON  nelson@physics.harvard.eduLyman"David Nelson's research focuses on collective effects in the physics and chemistry of condensed matter. He has been interested, in particular, in the interplay between fluctuations, geometry and statistical mechanics. In collaboration with his Harvard colleague, Bertrand I. Halperin, he is responsible for a theory of dislocation-mediated melting in two dimensions. The prediction of Halperin and Nelson of a fourth "hexatic" phase of matter, interposed between the usual solid and liquid phases, has now been confirmed in experiments on thin films and bulk liquid crystals. Nelson's research includes a theory of the structure and statistical mechanics of metallic glasses and investigations of "tethered surfaces", which are two-dimensional generalizations of linear polymer chains. These fishnet-like structures exhibit a remarkable low temperature flat phase upon cooling. Nelson has also studied the flux line entanglement in the new, high temperature superconductors. At high magnetic fields, thermal fluctuations cause regular arrays of flux lines to melt into a tangled spaghetti state. The physics of this melted flux liquid has important implications for many of the proposed applications of these new materials. His current interests include vortex physics, the statistical mechanics of polymers, topological defects on frozen topographies and biophysics.

ROBERT WESTERVELT westervelt@physics.harvard.eduPierce"Robert Westervelt received his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley in 1977. Following a postdoctoral appointment at Berkeley, he moved to Harvard University, where he is currently Mallinckrodt Professor of Applied Physics & Physics, and Professor of Physics. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society.
Westervelt's group investigates the quantum behavior of electrons inside nanoscale semiconductor structures, and develops tools for the manipulation of biological systems.
In mesoscopic physics, the group has developed liquid-helium cooled scanning probe microscopes that can image electron motion through nanoscale devices. They visualized the flow of electron waves through a two-dimensional electron gas (Topinka et al. 2003) and observed diffraction patterns and coherent interference (LeRoy et al. 2005), as well as cyclotron orbits in a magnetic field (Aidala et al. 2007). They have used the conducting tip as a movable gate to control a one-electron quantum dot formed in a semiconductor nanowire (Bleszynski et al. 2008) and a GaAs heterostructure (Fallahi et al. 2005). In related research, they have developed tunnel-coupled quantum dots and studied their behavior as artificial molecules (Livermore et al. 2006, Vidan et al. 2006) and tested Josephson junctions formed in Ge/Si nanowires (Xiang et al. 2006).
On the biophysics side, Westervelt's group has developed hybrid Integrated Circuit / Microfluidic chips that combine the power of CMOS technology with the biocompatibility of microfluidics (Lee, Ham & Westervelt, 2007, Hunt et al. 2008). These devices act as programmable microfluidic systems that can trap, move, sort, and assemble biological cells and small particles in fluids.
Robert Westervelt is Director of the NSF-funded Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center, Science of Nanoscale Systems and their Device Applications, which is basedat Harvard University and includes participants at MIT, UC Santa Barbara and the Museum of Science, Boston. Previously Westervelt served as Director of the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center and as Co-Director of the Joint Services Electronics Program, both at Harvard.

XIAOWEI ZHUANG zhuang@chemistry.harvard.eduNaito"The Zhuang research lab develops optical imaging techniques to monitor the behavior of individual biological molecules and complexes in vitro and in live cells. Our current research is focused on three major directions: (1) Developing super-resolution optical microscopy that allows imaging of cells and tissues with molecular-scale resolution; (2) Studying how biomolecules function, especially how proteins and nucleic acids interact, using single-molecule imaging; (3) Developing live-cell imaging techniques and investigating virus-cell interactions using live-cell imaging.
Super-resolution Optical Imaging Optical microscopy is one of the most widely used imaging methods in biophysical and biomedical research. However, the spatial resolution of far-field optical microscopy, classically limited by the diffraction of light to ~300 nm, is substantially larger than typical molecular length scales in cells, leaving many biological problems beyond the reach of light microscopy. To overcome this limit, we have developed a new form of high resolution light microscopy, stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM). STORM uses photo-switchable fluorescent probes to temporally separate the otherwise spatially overlapping images of individual molecules, allowing the construction of high-resolution images. Using this concept, we have achieved three-dimensional, multicolor fluorescence imaging of molecular complexes, cells and tissues with ~20 nm lateral and ~50 nm axial resolutions. We are advancing STORM capabilities to ultimately enable real-time imaging of cells and tissues with resolution at the true molecular length scale. This new form of fluorescence microscopy allows molecular-interactions in cells and cell-cell interactions in tissues to be imaged at the nanometer scale. We are applying the STORM technology to cell biology and neurobiology.
Nucleic Acid  Protein Interaction Many essential cellular reactions, such as DNA replication, transcription, messenger RNA editing, and protein synthesis, involve DNA-protein or RNA-protein complexes. Understanding nucleic acid-protein interactions is thus crucial for deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying these central biological processes. We are using single-molecule fluorescence imaging to visualize the assembly process of these molecular complexes and the dynamic interactions between DNA, RNA and proteins within these complexes in real time. These experiments allow us to reveal transient states and multiple kinetic paths that are difficult to detect by classical ensemble experiments, to directly determine the relation between structural dynamics of these molecular complexes and their function, and thus to provide mechanistic understandings of these biomolecular processes. Using this approach, we are studying the assembly, the catalytic cycle, and the structure-function relation of nucleic acid interacting enzymes, such as telomerase and HIV reverse transcriptase.
Virus-cell InteractionsViruses must deliver their genome into cells to initiate infection. This process is referred to as viral entry, a subject of fundamental importance as well as a therapeutic target for viral disease treatment. However, understanding viral entry mechanisms is challenging because of the involvement of multiple entry pathways and multiple steps on the pathway, each featuring dynamic interactions of the viruses with different cellular structures. What could then be a better way to study virus trafficking than taking a ride with the virus particle on its journey into the cell? To realize this goal, we have developed real-time imaging methods to track individual virus particles in live cells. This approach allows us to follow the fate of individual viruses, to dissect the entry pathways into microscopic steps, and to determine the molecular mechanism of each step. Using this approach, we are investigating the entry mechanisms of influenza virus and poliovirus, as well as related cellular trafficking pathways. Our research also extends to the assembly and budding mechanisms of viruses.

EFTHIMIOS KAXIRAS kaxiras@physics.harvard.eduLyman"The modern theory of materials, based on the quantum theory of solids and powerful computational methods, makes it possible to apply the theoretical concepts to realistic situations. This allows researchers to explain experimental findings in great detail, as well as to make predictions about possible new structures and materials with interesting behavior.
Our group explores these possibilities for applications to important scientific questions, like the microscopic origin of complex phenomena in materials, for example, the brittle-to-ductile transition in solids. We are also interested in using these theoretical tools to address societal needs, such as the development of novel materials for efficient solar energy conversion or for better energy storage devices, as well as problems related to biomolecules, like DNA, and their interaction with materials such as carbon nanotubes and graphene. All these research topics can lead to better understanding of fundamental issues in the behavior of materials, or to solutions for practical problems in energy and biomedical applications.

https://www.physics.harvard.edu//people/facpages/bloembergenhttps://www.physics.harvard.edu//people/facpages/bloembergen"
JENNY HOFFMAN jhoffman@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Professor Hoffman is interested in how electrons behave within exotic materials. Her research team at Harvard has designed and constructed three low-temperature scanning probe microscopes to visualize and manipulate this behavior directly. Innovative techniques include quasiparticle interference imaging to extract the band structure of materials at the nanoscale, and force microscopy to trigger nanoscale electronic phase transitions. Materials of particular interest include high temperature superconductors, topological insulators, and strongly correlated vanadates, all of which present deep physics questions as well as potential for novel applications.
Superconductivity  the lossless conduction of electrical current  arises from the pairing of electrons on the Fermi surface. The discovery of high Tc superconductors launched hopes for widespread application, but significant challenges remain. For example, motion of vortices  quanta of magnetic flux  causes noise and dissipation in superconducting devices. Vortices can be pinned by the controlled introduction of defects into the superconductor. The Hoffman lab uses magnetic force microscopy (MFM) to manipulate individual superconducting vortices and directly quantify their interaction and pinning forces in picoNewtons. Furthermore, alternative order parameters may weaken superconductivity by competing for the Fermi surface electrons. The Hoffman lab uses scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to visualize and understand this competition and its effect on the Fermi surface.
Topological insulators are 3D insulators with 2D metallic surface states. The robust spin-polarization of these surface states, and their protection against backscattering, suggests their utility for dissipationless spintronics devices. Furthermore, predicted topological behavior in proximity to superconducting or magnetic materials has led to numerous proposals for fault-tolerant quantum computing, as well as magnetoelectric effects for low-power-consumption electronics. The Hoffman lab uses STM to understand and quantify these behaviors, as well as to identify new topological materials. A newly constructed molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system, coupled to the existing STM, will allow atomic precision growth of novel heterostructures to identify emergent behavior at the interfaces between topological and broken-symmetry materials.

VENKATESH venky@seas.harvard.eduPierce"Please note: this is an archived page!For current information, please go to http://venky.seas.harvard.edu/.
Professor Narayanamurtis current research is directed mainly at the physics of electron and hole transport in novel semiconductor electronic materials and devices. The primary methods used are scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and ballistic electron emission microscopy (BEEM). Unlike more traditional methods (such as IV), BEEM allows the study of local transport with nanometer resolution. Depending on the carrier mean free path, interfaces buried deep in the semiconductor can be probed. In addition, the energy distribution of the injected carriers can be independently varied simply by varying the tip voltage. Professor Narayanamurtis laboratory has four BEEM/STM devices, and the technique is applied to a diverse set of problems. Recent examples include the following:
Using the scanning probe capabilities Professor Narayanamurti and his coworkers recently succeeded in imaging single InAs and InP self assembled quantum dots (SAQDs) of typical size 300= buried spatially beneath an Au/GaAs interface. The BEEM images show enhanced current through quantum dots located by the STM topography. Further, BEEM current spectra (collector current vs. tip voltage) show structures at tip biases below the Schottky barrier threshold, when positioned above the dot. When the tip is positioned off the dot, no such structure is observed. The results provide the first evidence of resonant tunneling through a zero-dimensional (0D) state within SAQDs.
BEEM is also being used for probing such fundamental properties as heterojunction band offsets, transport in new and technologically important wide bandgap semiconductors such as GaN and AlGaInP, and tunneling through minibands of semiconductor superlattices. Second derivative BEEM spectroscopy is used to directly monitor the heterostructure transmission coefficient.
Finally, important new modifications of BEEM instruments are being developed. Metal coated fibers are being used to replace gold tips for simultaneous probing of the local luminescence due to electron injection into p-type material.

WILLIAM PAUL paul@seas.harvard.eduPierce"
PETER S. PERSHAN  pershan@seas.harvard.eduPierce"Peter Pershans research primarily involves the use of x-rays to probe the structure and critical properties of matter. Although his laboratory at Harvard includes an in-house x-ray facility, most of the experiments eventually require the special properties of synchrotron generated x-rays. Synchrotron facilities that have been used in the past include the National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island, NY; the HASYLAB in Hamburg, Germany; the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory at Stanford, CA; and the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in Grenoble, France. Instrumentation currently under construction at the Advanced Photon Laboratory at Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL will be used in the near future. The common theme for most of the experiments recently carried out is to characterize the structure and two-dimensional statistical properties of liquid surfaces. Examples of the phenomena studied include the theoretically predicted stratification, or atomic layering, at the surfaces of liquid metals; the power law singularity in two- dimensional thermal excitations on the surfaces of liquids; quantum mechanical predictions of an asymmetry in the electron density profile between superfluid 4He and its vapor; structure and the structure and thermal fluctuations of thin wetting liquid films adsorbed onto both liquid and solid surfaces.

ISAAC F. SILVERA silvera@physics.harvard.eduLyman"
AMIR YACOBY yacoby@physics.harvard.eduLISE"Professor Yacoby is an experimental condensed matter physicist. His current research interests are focused at unraveling the underlying phenomena governing low dimensional systems. Starting with two dimensional electron systems, the group uses novel scan probe techniques that are capable of detecting electric charge with a resolution of 10 -4 of one electron and spatial resolution of 100nm. This technique enables them to image the distribution of electrons and the way they localize in space in various material systems such as GaAs or single monolayers of graphite as well as under various ground state conditions such as the integer and fractional quantum Hall effect. Of particular interest is the 5/2 fractional quantum Hall ground state where the elementary excitations carry a fractional charge of e/4 and obey non-Abelian statistics. Such a system is a model system for topological quantum computation.
Reducing dimensionality further to one dimension opens up a fascinating world where electrical conduction is strongly governed by the interaction between electrons. Here the group explores experimentally Luttinger liquid behavior whose strongest manifestation is the separation of spin and charge of the elementary excitations.
Finally going down to zero dimensional systems, know as quantum dots, the group studies various approaches to storing and manipulating quantum information using the spin of individual electrons.

BERTRAND I. HALPERIN halperin@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Bertrand Halperin's research interests include many aspects of the theory of condensed matter systems and statistical physics. A major portion of Halperin's current research involves the theory of electron states and transport in small particles of a metal or semiconductor. Much of this work has been motivated by experiments carried out in various laboratories at Harvard. Halperin is Scientific Director of the Harvard Center for Imaging and Mesoscale Systems (CIMS, www.cims.harvard.edu), which has been set up by the Faculty of Arts and Sciences to encourage interdisciplinary research and education in this area.
Another major portion of Halperin's work concerns properties of two-dimensional electron systems at low temperatures in strong magnetic fields, or "quantum Hall systems". Experiments on these systems, since 1980, have revealed a succession of very surprising phenomena, which have required the introduction of a number of new theoretical methods for their explanation. Halperin has been involved in the development of several of these methods. A number of very puzzling experimental results still exist in this field, particularly in experiments involving bi-layer systems, which remain a challenge to theoretical understanding.
Other current interests include superconductivity, transport in inhomogeneous systems, and nuclear magnetic resonance experiments in porous media. Previous research interests have included quantum antiferromagnets in one and two dimensions, low-temperature properties of glasses, melting and other phase transitions in two-dimensional systems, and the theory of dynamic phenomena near a phase transition.

PAUL C. MARTIN martin@physics.harvard.eduLyman"
RICHARD WILSON wilson@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"
GARY J. FELDMAN feldman@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Gary Feldman's research interests are in the experimental study of neutrino oscillations. Currently his group is working on the MINOS Experiment at Fermilab. MINOS is a two-detector experiment, which compares the signals observed in a near detector on the Fermilab site with those observed in a far detector in the lowest level of the Sudan mine in northern Minnesota. The goal of the experiment is to verify the results seen in the observation of atmospheric neutrinos and to make more precise measurements of the oscillation parameters.
The Harvard group designed and, in collaboration with Oxford University, built the front-end electronics for the MINOS far detector. Its main analysis interest is in the detection and study of the rare process of a muon-type neutrino oscillating into an electron-type neutrino. The detection of this process is the key to the future studies of the mass-ordering of neutrino states and CP violation in the leptonic sector.
The study of muon-type to electron-type neutrino oscillations will be furthered by the construction of the 30 kT NOvA detector in northern Minnesota. Professor Feldman is the co-spokesperson of the NOvA Experiment.

MELISSA FRANKLIN franklin@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Melissa Franklin is the Mallinckrodt Professor of Physics at Harvard University. She is an experimental particle physicist who is working on studies of hadron collisions produced by the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory with the Collider Detector Facility (CDF) and the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). She works in a collaboration of over 600 international physicists who discovered the top quark at CDF, and 3000 physicists at ATLAS where she studies particle interactions and symmetries at the highest energies now available worldwide when the accelerator turns on this fall. Professor Franklin, born and raised in Canada, received her B.Sc. from the University of Toronto and her Doctorate from Stanford University. She worked as a post-doctoral fellow at Lawrence Berkeley Lab, an assistant professor at the University of Illinois in Champagne/Urbana and was a Junior Fellow in the Society of Fellows at Harvard, before joining the Harvard faculty in 1989 and becoming the first female tenured faculty member in the department of physics in 1992.

JOAO GUIMARAES guimar@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Joao Guimares da Costa is an experimental physicist engaged in high energy elementary particle physics research at energy frontier colliders. His main research interest is the search for new physics phenomena beyond the experimentally well established Standard Model. He works at both the Collider Detector at Fermilab (CDF) experiment in Chicago and the ATLAS experiment in Geneva, Switzerland.
Professor Guimares interests at the CDF, an experiment that studies proton and anti-proton collisions at the Tevatron Collider, are studies of the top quark and searches forthe Higgs boson. The top quark, discovered at CDF in 1995, is an unique probe for possible new physics at high energies, while the discovery of the Higgs boson would shine light into the origins of mass and the electroweak symmetry breaking process.
The high-energy frontier will soon shift to the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), a proton-proton collider at CERN. Professor Guimares is working at the ATLAS experiment where he is contributing to the muon spectrometer construction. The ATLAS experiment has an enormous potential for new discoveries ranging from new particles like the Higgs boson or dark matter candidates, to exotic new phenomena like large extra dimensions or small black holes. The next few years promise to be an uniquely exciting time in the history of particle physics, and all starts in late 2007 when the ATLAS experiment will record the first collisions.

JOHN HUTH huth@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Professor Huth works mainly in the field of experimental particle physics. His main interest is in electroweak symmetry breaking and is a member of the ATLAS Collaboration at the European Center for Nuclear Physics (CERN).
The ATLAS Experiment, along with its sister experiment, CMS, recently discovered the Higgs Boson in proton-proton collisions at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Professor Huth is working on the decay of the Higgs into pairs of bottom quarks, and also on upgrades to the ATLAS Muon Spectrometer.
He has recently completed a book, The Lost Art of Finding Our Way, which describes techniques and cultures of navigation predating the invention of the nautical chronometer. This book is an outgrowth of his course, Primitive Navigation (SPU 26).
Professor Huth is a member of the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Studys Venture Faculty Program. The goal of the Program is to foster multidisciplinary studies that cut across the boundaries of traditional academic fields.

MASAHIRO MORII morii@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Masahiro Morii is an experimental physicist working on studies of elementary particles and their interactions. He is currently involved in the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. The experiment is anticipated to uncover the origin of the electroweak symmetry breaking, and has a great potential for discovering new physics beyond the Standard Model.
Prof. Morii has also been involved in the LUX Dark Matter Experiment, which operates in the Sanford Underground Laboratory at Homestake, SD. The experiment uses 300 kg of liquid xenon to detect the Dark Matter - an invisible form of matter which make up 4/5 of the mass of the Universe.

HOWARD M. GEORGI georgi@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"Howard Georgi has ongoing research programs in several areas of theoretical particle physics. The common elements in these areas are symmetries and quantum field theory. Georgi pioneered the subject of Grand Unified Theories, both without (with Sheldon Glashow) and with supersymmetry (with Savas Dimopoulos), invented the modern QCD quark model (with Glashow and Alvaro De Rujula), the chiral quark model (with former student Aneesh Manohar), and the Heavy Quark Effective Theory.
The most important issue in particle physics today is the question of what causes the spontaneous breaking of the SU(2) x U(1) symmetry of the electroweak interactions. Georgi (who with former student David Kaplan showed how one could build composite Higgs bosons) studies the possibility of strong coupling models and attempts to find new mechanisms of symmetry breaking.
He also studies QCD, the formalism of effective field theories, the strong CP problem, and the flavor puzzle.
Recently, Georgi has been exploring the properties of theories in which a scale-invariant sector of the world is weakly coupled to the standard model. In the scale invariant sector, energy and momentum is not bundled in particles, so Georgi dubbed this strange situation "unparticle physics." (DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.131603)
In addition, Georgi is interested in increasing the participation of women and minorities in science and is on a number of local and national committees that attempt to address this important issue.

ARTHUR M. JAFFE jaffe@physics.harvard.eduLyman"Arthur Jaffe's major scientific work has been in the realm of understanding quantum theory and the mathematics that it inspires. Jaffe solved a fundamental question by showing the compatibility of special relativity, quantum theory, and interactions. With J. Glimm he constructed the first mathematically-complete and non-trivial examples of relativistic quantum field theories. Recently Jaffe's research has focused on the relation between super-symmetry and a new mathematical subject -- non-commutative geometry-- where one builds quantum space into the notion of space-time.
In the 1970's, Jaffe was instrumental in starting a series of summer schools for mathematical physics in Cargse, Corsica , which inspired many future leaders in the field. Jaffe was active in the 1970's in founding the International Association of Mathematical Physics and later served for 6 years as President of the Association. While Chairman of the Harvard Mathematics Department (1987-1990) he began a program that brought numerous mathematical visitors from Russia and Eastern Europe to the United States . He served as president of the American Mathematical Society (1997-1998), and later was Chair of the Council of Scientific Society Presidents and of the Mathematics Section of the AAAS.
During the early 1980's Jaffe served on the David Committee to revitalize funding for mathematical research, writing "Ordering the Universe: the Role of Mathematics." This article has been reprinted in several places and translated into several languages. In 1993, Jaffe wrote a widely-quoted article with Frank Quinn entitled "Theoretical Mathematics" evoking extended discussion about the concept of mathematical proof and the relations between mathematics and physics.
In 1998, Jaffe guided the conception of the Clay Mathematics Institute and of its programs. He was a Founding Member of its Board of Directors and a Founding Member of its Corporation; he served as its Founding President from 1999 to 2002. In this role Jaffe brought mathematics research into public focus, and also encouraged students to pursue mathematical careers. Jaffe has also served as a member of several other boards.
Jaffe edited numerous journals and book series, and for twenty years was Chief Editor of Springer's Communications in Mathematical Physics, a leading journal in his field. He has written over 150 scientific articles, he has co-authored two books, has two volumes of collected reprints, and serves as coeditor of several Summer School and Conference Proceedings publications.
Jaffe is a Member of the National Academy of Sciences and is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

https://www.physics.harvard.edu//people/facpages/jafferisjafferis@fas.harvard.eduJefferson"

LISA RANDALL randall@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"
MATTHEW REECE reece@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"Matthew Reece's research centers around connecting theoretical particle physics with new experimental results. This work proceeds mostly on two fronts. One is building models that attempt to extend the Standard Model of particle physics in ways that address various puzzles arising in quantum field theory and cosmology. The second is proposing specific ways to test such models in experiments, and analyzing and interpreting new experimental results as they are published. In particular, much of Reece's recent work has involved closely following experimental results of the Large Hadron Collider and exploring their implications for particle physics. He has contributed to showing how the LHC's recent measurement of the Higgs boson mass falsifies many minimal models of supersymmetry and effectively rules out a class of supersymmetric models, "general gauge mediation", that was previously thought to be a compelling possibility for weak-scale physics. He has a longstanding interest in the experimental implications of the hierarchy problem, which in the context of supersymmetry has led him to study experimental signatures of the scalar top (or stop) quark, a supersymmetric partner of the top quark that cancels large quadratic divergences in the Standard Model.
Although the LHC, at the energy frontier, is producing dramatic results now, Reece is also interested in other experiments, in particular those at the precision frontier. In past work he has proposed that high-intensity, medium-energy experiments, like KLOE, BaBar, and Belle, may be able to detect new forces by studying rare decays of mesons. He has also studied a general effective field theory that applies to the direct detection of dark matter, and continues to be interested in both direct and indirect detection of dark matter. New results from a wide range of precision observations including the Fermi-LAT telescope, the XENON100 dark matter experiment, and the ACME electron electric dipole experiment all promise to either discover new physics or set powerful new constraints in the near future, and Prof. Reece will be actively following these exciting developments and working to place them in a broader particle physics context.
Reece's work also involves more abstract issues in quantum field theory. In the past, he has worked on understanding the limitations of holographic models for the study of strongly interacting systems like QCD, as well as how unitarity constrains operators in effective field theory like the S-parameter.

MATTHEW D. SCHWARTZ schwartz@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"Matthew Schwartz's research is focused on expanding the boundaries of our current understanding of particle physics. This includes both developing new theoretical techniques for precision calculations and exploring the phenomenological consequences of new physics scenarios. He has contributed to diverse realms of particle physics, such as supergravity, strong dynamics, flavor physics, quantum chromodynamics, B-physics, grand unification, and non-perturbative models of nuclear structure based on extra dimensions.His current research is devoted to getting better theoretical control over difficult but critically important discovery channels at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). To this end, he work mostly in two broad areas: developing new ideas and methods for precision calculations in quantum chromodynamics (QCD) and in isolating distinguishing features of new physics models.In his work on QCD, Prof. Schwartz has been exploring how to take calculations of important observables at colliders to new levels of precision. By expanding in variables more appropriate than the strong coupling constant, such as jet masses, he has provided he world's best calculation of a number of observables, including some e+e- event shapes and the spectrum of high energy gauge bosons at hadron colliders. Professor Schwartz has also been instrumental in establishing the field of jet substructure as an essential component of the LHC program. He has made foundational contributions to the phenomenology of top jets, color flow, and quark and gluon jet discrimination.

ANDREW STROMINGER strominger@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"The fundamental laws of nature, as we currently understand them, are both incomplete and self-contradictory. Unsolved problems include the unification of forces and particles, the origin of the universe and the quantum structure of black holes and event horizons. Professor Stromingers research has endeavored to shed light on these problems using a variety of approaches. The emergence of string theory as a potential unified theory of nature began with Stromingers co-discovery of Calabi-Yau compactifications1. This construction demonstrated that string theory not only reconciles quantum mechanics and gravity, but can also contain within it electrons, protons, photons and all the other observed particles and forces, and hence is a viable candidate for a complete unified theory of nature. Strominger co-discovered the brane solutions of string theory2, and subsequently used them to unravel the intricate and beautiful duality symmetries of the theory. The branes were eventually used by Strominger and collaborators to give a microscopic demonstration of how black holes are able to holographically store information3; resolving a deep paradox uncovered by Hawking and Bekenstein a quarter century earlier. He and coworkers also used the branes to derive new relations in algebraic geometry, equating the moduli space of a brane in a Calabi-Yau space to the mirror Calabi-Yau4, and relating the Donaldson-Thomas to the Gromov-Witten invariants5.Stromingers recent research has focused on universal aspects of black holes and horizons, which do not depend on detailed microphysical assumptions. A new conformal symmetry of rapidly spinning black holes was discovered6 and used to explain how they holographically store quantum information. Strominger and coworkers found a mathematically precise mathematical relation between the Navier-Stokes and Einstein equation7, demonstrating that horizons evolve as incompressible fluids and providing a bridge between fluid dynamics and general relativity. Very recent efforts have addressed the quantum structure of the cosmological horizons which likely surround us8.A public lecture by Professor Strominger on "The Edges of the Universe: Black Holes, Horizons and Strings" can be found on The Royal Society website; "String Theory, Black Holes and the Fundamental Laws of Nature" at Harvard@Home, and a colloquium "Black Holes: the Harmonic Oscillators of the 21rst Century" on the Harvard Physics Video Archive.

CUMRUN VAFA vafa@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"Cumrun Vafa's primary area of research is string theory. String theory, a subject that is about four decades old, is at the center of efforts by theoretical physicists to find a unified fundamental theory of nature. String theory provides a framework to unify everything we know about nature, including all particles and the forces between them, in a consistent quantum theory. This is an ambitious goal, given that it aims to describe physical phenomena involving scales 1025 times smaller than the atom, as well as the cosmology of our entire universe, which involves a scale of about 1037 times bigger than the atom. In a single theory, one studies the mysteries of confinement of quarks inside atomic nuclei, as well as enigmatic properties of astrophysical objects such as black holes.
Such an all-encompassing theory necessarily requires a tremendous amount of mathematical technology. In fact, most of the mathematics needed for string theory is not even yet developed. String theorists thus have the exciting task of building new mathematics as tools to explore new laws of physics. It is therefore not surprising that string theory is at the cross roads of many fields, including mathematics, particle phenomenology and astrophysics. Cumrun Vafa's research has involved essentially all these aspects. Together with his colleagues he has worked on topological strings, trying to elucidate some new mathematics originating from string theory (notably in his work on mirror symmetry) and using these techniques to uncover some of the mysteries of black holes, particularly the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy. He has also applied these ideas to particle theories by geometrically engineering quantum field theories, as well as solving the strong coupling dynamics of confining theories (using large N matrix model technology) and geometrizing string theory defects (in a limit of string theory known as F-theory). His recent work involves applying these ideas to come up with stringy predictions about what the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN may potentially discover in the near future.

TAI T. WU wu@physics.harvard.eduPierce"Tai Tsun Wus research includes projects in high-energy particle physics, statistical mechanics, classical electromagnetic theory, and quantum information processing. He has a long-standing interest in the theory of very-high-energy collisions. Some of his unexpected predictions, such as the increasing total cross sections, have been verified experimentally at the CERN proton-antiproton Collider and the Fermilab Tevatron Collider. Recent efforts have been concentrated on understanding production processes for the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) being built at CERN and scheduled to become operational in September of 2007. One especially important process is the theoretical prediction for the production cross section of a Higgs particle with low momentum together with two forward jets. In statistical mechanics, Wus work is mostly on Bose-Einstein condensation in an external potential. In recent years, there has been a groundswell of interest in the general notion of applying quantum mechanics to advanced computing and communication. Appropriate for groundbreaking conceptual work, the models used to arouse interest in quantum computing and secure quantum communication have been the simplest possible. In particular, most of the early work was based on the Schrdinger equation without any spatial dimension. The idea being pursued here is to apply quantum mechanics and quantum field theory to these problems, including the modeling and application of quantum memories.

XI YIN xiyin@fas.harvard.eduJefferson"String theory, being our best hope for a complete description of quantum gravity and a unified theory of everything, also provides a powerful toolbox along the way for solving problems in seemingly very different subjects, such as strongly coupled quantum field theories, conformal field theory, integrable systems, algebraic geometry, hyperbolic geometry, etc. Xi Yin's research interest lies in the fundamental aspects of string theory, and what string theory can teach us about other fields in physics and mathematics. Yin's past works involve black holes [5], supersymmetric bound states in string theory [3,4], conformal field theory and gauge theory in three dimensions [2]. His current research focuses on quantum gravity in low dimensions (e.g. [1]), as well as the holographic duality between gauge theory and string theory/gravity (a.k.a. AdS/CFT correspondence).

PETER L. GALISON galison@physics.harvard.eduScience"The central component of Peter Galison's work involves the exploration of twentieth century microphysics (atomic, nuclear, particle physics). In particular, he examines physics as a closely interconnected set of scientific subcultures: experimenters, instrument makers, and theorists. For example, in How Experiments End (Chicago, 1987), he examined the ways in which experimenters come to the decision that they have an effect, not an artifact of the apparatus or environment. What role does theory play in the establishment of data reduction strategies, in triggering, or in the experimental set-up itself? How do large groups decide something is real? More recently, he has been interested in the long-standing competition between image-producing instruments such as bubble chambers, cloud chambers, and nuclear emulsions on one side, and the "logic" devices such as counters, spark chambers, and wire chambers on the other. Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics (Chicago, 1997) examines this duality and seeks to locate specific experimental technologies in the wider scientific and nonscientific world. Professor Galison is now turning to a history of postwar quantum field theory, in which he views QFT as a "trading zone" between different domains of physics (e.g. particle cosmology, mathematics, condensed matter physics).
On the side, he has tried to examine links between the history of science and neighboring fields - how, for example, historians of science and historians of art share methods and strategies.

GERALD HOLTON holton@physics.harvard.eduJefferson"CV 

